[hipfftw][docs] Documentation additions for hipFFTW (#2171)
ROCm/rocm-libraries: projects/hipfft/docs/reference/hipfftw-api-usage.rst

.. meta::
  :description: hipFFT documentation, hipFFTW documentation, and API reference library
  :keywords: FFT, hipFFT, hipFFTW, rocFFT, ROCm, API, documentation

.. _hipfftw-api-usage:

********************************************************************
hipFFTW API usage
********************************************************************

This section describes how to use the hipFFTW library API. The hipFFTW
API is a partial reproduction of the FFTW_ API.

.. _FFTW: https://www.fftw.org/

Data types
==========

Similarly to FFTW_, hipFFTW uses the following specific types.

.. doxygentypedef:: fftw_complex

.. doxygentypedef:: fftwf_complex

.. doxygentypedef:: fftw_plan

.. doxygentypedef:: fftwf_plan

Constant values
===============

.. _hipfftw-flag-values:

Flag values
-----------

All the hipFFTW :ref:`plan creation functions <hipfftw-plan-creation>` request an ``unsigned flags`` argument.

> The value of that argument conditions what hipFFTW may or may not consider when creating the requested plan. Valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value of that argument conditions what hipFFTW will consider when creating the requested plan. Valid
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

values are bitwise OR of zero of more of the following constant values.

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_MEASURE

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_DESTROY_INPUT

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_UNALIGNED

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_CONSERVE_MEMORY

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_EXHAUSTIVE

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_PRESERVE_INPUT

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_PATIENT

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_ESTIMATE

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_WISDOM_ONLY

.. note::

>   Even if seemingly accepted, flag values are currently ignored by hipFFTW. In particular, note that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Even if seemingly accepted, flag values are currently ignored by hipFFTW. In particular, note that:
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

  - preservation of input data is never guaranteed;
  - requests for a minimized memory footprint are ignored;

  with the current status of hipFFTW.

.. _hipfftw-sign-values:

Sign values
-----------

The hipFFTW :ref:`plan creation functions <hipfftw-plan-creation>` for complex transforms request an ``int sign``
argument. This argument determines whether the plan being created is meant to compute forward or backward (inverse)
discrete Fourier transforms. Valid values of that argument are either of the following constant values.

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_FORWARD

.. doxygendefine:: FFTW_BACKWARD

.. _hipfftw-buffer-management:

Buffer management
=================

hipFFTW supports the following buffer-management functions.

.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_malloc

.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_malloc

.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_alloc_real

.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_alloc_real

.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_alloc_complex

.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_alloc_complex

.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_free

.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_free

The memory blocks allocated by any of the above ``{fftw,fftwf}_{malloc,alloc_real,alloc_complex}``

> are always directly accessible to the host, but not necessarily to GPU. hipFFTW decides on the type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are always directly accessible to the host, but not necessarily to the GPU. hipFFTW decides on the type
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

of memory being allocated following a ranked-choice strategy: it attempts to allocate

1. pinned host memory, first;

> 2. pageable host memory, if the latter failed (or if the request exceeds a :ref:`user-defined threshold <hipfftw-env-byte-size-host-alloc>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of memory being allocated following a ranked-choice strategy. It attempts to allocate:

1. pinned host memory (first);
2. pageable host memory (if the latter failed or if the request exceeds a :ref:`user-defined threshold <hipfftw-env-byte-size-host-alloc>`).
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

.. important::
  Every buffer allocated via ``fftw_malloc``, ``fftwf_malloc``, ``fftw_alloc_real``, ``fftwf_alloc_real``,

>   ``fftw_alloc_complex`` or ``fftwf_alloc_complex`` **must** be freed using ``fftw_free`` or ``fftwf_free``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``fftw_alloc_complex``, or ``fftwf_alloc_complex`` **must** be freed using ``fftw_free`` or ``fftwf_free``.
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

.. _hipfftw-plan-creation:

Plan creation
=============

hipFFTW supports the creation of :ref:`basic <hipfftw-basic-plan-creation>`, :ref:`advanced <hipfftw-advanced-plan-creation>`,
and :ref:`general <hipfftw-general-plan-creation>` plans, using interleaved formats for complex floating-point data.

> Plans capture

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plans capture:
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

> - the type of transform, *i.e.*, complex or real, forward or backward (inverse) discrete Fourier transform;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the type of transform, for example, complex or real, forward or backward (inverse) discrete Fourier transform;
```

Author: I opted for "namely" instead as what follows is not quite an example but an explanation of what is meant by "type of transform" (see bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b). Feel free to make another suggestion if the choice is inappropriate.

Reviewer: That's fine, thanks!

- the length(s) and batch size(s) of the transform;

> - layout information for input and output data, *e.g.*, stride(s), distance(s);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- layout information for input and output data, for example, stride(s), distance(s);
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

- pointers to buffers that it should consider as input and output data buffers when computing a transform via a :ref:`generic execution function <hipfftw-execute-with-creation-io>`;

> - its flag value(s) used at creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the flag value(s) to use at creation.
```

Author: Done in 9bbac412d5fdc6f5d18fe8b3e12328f89b1a1bfe.

> A plan of interest may be created via more than one plan creation function. For instance, any plan created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A plan of interest can be created using more than one plan creation function. For instance, any plan created
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

by ``fftw_plan_dft`` (resp. ``fftwf_plan_dft``) could be created by ``fftw_plan_many_dft``

> (resp. ``fftwf_plan_many_dft``) without any difference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by ``fftw_plan_dft`` (or ``fftwf_plan_dft``) could be created by ``fftw_plan_many_dft``
(or ``fftwf_plan_many_dft``) without any difference.
```

Author: Done in 73830792cc0c4e2026d31f96f2aeb859a8b1b424.

For all plan creation functions, the requested plan is said to be configured for in-place (resp. out-of-place)

> operations if identical (resp. different) input and output buffers are used when the plan is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all plan creation functions, the requested plan is said to be configured for in-place
operations if identical (or out-of-place if different) input and output buffers are used when the plan is created.
```

Reviewer: Can you check that this captures the idea correctly?

Author: Modified in a slightly different fashion (still avoiding the "resp.") in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b. Please comment if inappropriate.

.. note::
  - hipFFTW does not support split complex formats, real-to-real transforms, nor distributed transforms;
  - hipFFTW does not support transforms of more than 3 dimensions, *i.e.*, ``rank > 3`` is not supported;

>   - hipFFTW does not support transforms of more than 1 batch dimension, *i.e.*, ``batch_rank > 1`` is not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - hipFFTW does not support transforms of more than 3 dimensions, for example, ``rank > 3`` is not supported;
  - hipFFTW does not support transforms of more than 1 batch dimension, for example, ``batch_rank > 1`` is not supported.
```

Author: I opted for "that is" instead of "for example" in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b, as what follows is an explanation of what precedes, not an example. Please comment if inappropriate.

.. _hipfftw-basic-plan-creation:

Basic plans
-----------

Basic plans are implicitly configured for unbatched transforms with compact, default data layouts. For :math:`d`-dimensional (:math:`d > 0`)
transforms of lengths :math:`n_0 \times n_1 \times \ldots \times n_{d-1}` (:math:`n_{i} > 0\, \forall i \in \lbrace 0, 1, \ldots, d-1\rbrace`),
default data layouts use strides :math:`s_i` along dimension :math:`i` where

- :math:`s_{d-1} = 1`;
- if :math:`d > 1`,
    - :math:`s_{d-2} = 2 \lfloor n_{d-1} / 2 + 1 \rfloor` on input (resp. output) and :math:`s_{d-2} = \lfloor n_{d-1} / 2 + 1 \rfloor` on output (resp. input) for forward (resp. backward) real in-place transforms;
    - :math:`s_{d-2} = n_{d-1}` on input (resp. output) and :math:`s_{d-2} = \lfloor n_{d-1} / 2 + 1 \rfloor` on output (resp. input) for forward (resp. backward) real out-of-place transforms;
    - :math:`n_{d-1}` otherwise.
- if :math:`d > 2`, :math:`s_{i} = n_{i+1}s_{i+1}` for :math:`0 \leq i < d-2`.

> The following functions may be used for creating basic hipFFTW plans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following functions can be used for creating basic hipFFTW plans.
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b

.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_1d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_1d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_2d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_2d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_3d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_3d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_r2c_1d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_r2c_1d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_r2c_2d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_r2c_2d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_r2c_3d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_r2c_3d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_r2c
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_r2c
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_c2r_1d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_c2r_1d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_c2r_2d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_c2r_2d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_c2r_3d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_c2r_3d
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_plan_dft_c2r
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_plan_dft_c2r

.. _hipfftw-advanced-plan-creation:

Advanced plans
--------------

.. TBD

.. _hipfftw-general-plan-creation:

Arbitrary plans
---------------

.. TBD

.. _hipfftw-execution:

Plan execution
==============

> Once successfully created, hipFFTW plans may be executed, *i.e.*, used for computing the discrete Fourier transform that they capture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After they are successfully created, hipFFTW plans can be executed, that is, used for computing the discrete Fourier transform that they capture.
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

The :ref:`generic execution functions <hipfftw-execute-with-creation-io>` implicitly reuse the input and output buffers that were set

> at :ref:`plan creation <hipfftw-plan-creation>`. If that is not possible or impractical, new input and output buffers may be communicated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at :ref:`plan creation <hipfftw-plan-creation>`. If that is not possible or impractical, new input and output buffers can be communicated
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_execute_dft_r2c
.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_execute_dft_c2r
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_execute_dft_c2r

.. note::
  When new input and output buffers are used for execution, they must honor the placement that was set at plan creation.
  In other words, the result of ``(void*)in == (void*)out`` must be unchanged between plan creation and plan execution.

.. note::
  If the type of memory for the output buffer is directly accessible by the host, hipFFTW enforces synchronization before
  returning from any of the above :ref:`execution functions <hipfftw-execution>` to guarantee that the results are readily
  available to the host upon completion of the execution function.

Plan destruction
================

When no longer needed or going out of scope, hipFFTW plans must be destructed using either of the following functions
matching the plan's precision.

.. doxygenfunction:: fftw_destroy_plan
.. doxygenfunction:: fftwf_destroy_plan

Other utility functions (existing yet non-functional)
=====================================================

The following functions exist in hipFFTW but are **not** functional in any way: they are effectively ignoring all

> arguments and made to systematically return ``0.0`` when a ``double`` value is to be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following functions exist in hipFFTW but are **not** functional in any way. They effectively ignore all
arguments and systematically return ``0.0`` when a ``double`` value needs to be returned.
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

- ``fftw_print_plan`` and ``fftwf_print_plan``;
- ``fftw_set_timelimit`` and ``fftwf_set_timelimit``;
- ``fftw_cost`` and ``fftwf_cost``;
- ``fftw_flops`` and ``fftwf_flops``;
- ``fftw_cleanup`` and ``fftwf_cleanup``.

.. _hipfftw-env-vars:

Environment variables specific to hipFFTW
=========================================

.. _hipfftw-env-byte-size-host-alloc:

Enforcing size limits on types of memory for user-managed buffers
-----------------------------------------------------------------

By setting any of the environment variables

- ``HIPFFTW_BYTE_SIZE_LIMIT_PINNED_HOST_ALLOC``;
- ``HIPFFTW_BYTE_SIZE_LIMIT_PAGEABLE_HOST_ALLOC``;

to a non-negative integer value, users can instruct hipFFTW to observe the value set so as the maximal

> byte size that may be considered for the corresponding kind of host-accessible memory for any individual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to a non-negative integer value, users can instruct hipFFTW to observe the value set for the maximal
byte size that can be considered for the corresponding kind of host-accessible memory for any individual
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

allocation requested via the :ref:`buffer allocation functions <hipfftw-buffer-management>`. Setting
any of the above variables to ``0`` effectively prevents the corresponding kind of memory to be

> considered in user-requested buffer allocations altogether, for instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
considered in user-requested buffer allocations altogether.
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

.. _hipfftw-env-verbose-exceptions:

> Turning hipFFTW verbose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making hipFFTW verbose
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

-----------------------

> Debugging failures or errors suspected to be triggered by hipFFTW may turn challenging, particularly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debugging failures or errors suspected to be triggered by hipFFTW can be challenging, particularly
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

> if the root-cause lies in any of the :ref:`execution functions <hipfftw-execution>` given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if the root cause lies in any of the :ref:`execution functions <hipfftw-execution>`, given
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.

that these functions' signatures make such errors silent by design. Setting the environment variable
``HIPFFTW_LOG_EXCEPTIONS`` to a strictly positive integer value effectively instructs hipFFTW to become

> verbose about internal exceptions it may encounter by reporting about them into the standard error stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
verbose about internal exceptions it might encounter by reporting them to the standard error stream.
```

Author: Done in bb1f53d33dc9ed13155ece673ffae750bd1e2c2b.
